---
layout: post
title: First Calls
date: 2024-04-28
---

My first call was discouraging.  To start, I was calling the person most explicitly tasked with representing me in Congress, which as a DC resident is a reminder that I don't have a voting representative in Congress.  But the receptionist in Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton's office was polite as I nervously explained my concerns about AI and the legistlation that I wanted the Congresswoman to support (more on that in a future post!).  When I paused for breath, she asked if she could put me on hold to see if there was someone I could speak to.  She came back shortly to tell me that a person names Jesse would get back to me, and took my name and number and email address.

This, I gather, is standard. To a first approximation, the job a receptionist to a member of Congress is to figure out why you are there and then politely invite you to fuck off as quickly as possible.  When I proposed the idea for this project in my group, another student asked if I was worried I would come off as a crazy person. I am! There are few concerns more crazy-person-sounding than a robot apocalypse, and it's hard to express concerns about AI to someone who isn't already concerned about AI without it coming across as "robot apocalypse".

So I wasn't surprised that I didn't an audience from my first call.  My intent in these first calls was to break the ice, dip a toe and get a feel for it -- in that it was a great success.

And then they called me back, to ask for further clarification.  I went into a little more depth about the issues AI is creating and is likely to create, focusing on areas I knew Congresswoman Norton to be concerned about: inequality, unemployment, misinformation, oppression.  But what they were really concerned about was the legislation I mentioned: the Federal Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Act and the CREATE AI Act.  A lot of consituent interaction, it seems, is boiled down to a tally mark next to an issue or piece of legislation.

That impression was confirmed in my next call, to Senator Mark Warner's office.  

Senator Warner is not my Senator, I don't have representation in Senate.  But about a third of his constituents live in the Washington Metropolitan Area, and he was a sponsor of the Federal Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Act in the 118th Congress.  I figured I'd either be treated as an honorary constituent, or the topic would be relevant enough that he'd pay attention.

In fact, his receptionist didn't ask whether I was a constituent, and I didn't tell her otherwise.  She asked what I was calling about, I gave my shpiel, and she had me repeat the name of the bills twice as she wrote them down.  She then politley but unceremoniously thanked me and ended the call.

That was roughly what I'd expected.  Just by dint of their population of constituents, the average Senator must get a lot more calls than the average member of the House (and Congresswoman Norton in particular, by dint of DC's lack of standing).  It also makes sense that they would be less concerned about whether the caller is a constituent, because their role is more national, and their influence more determined by their perception in the public at large.

So, again, my call was memorialized as a tally mark next to the name of a piece of legislation.  But, given the care with which the receptionist recorded it, and the number of times she asked me to repeat it, I may have been the first to bring it up in some time.

If the name of a bill gets onto a piece of paper, and that paper gets into the Senator's hands, does that impact the likelihood of that bill becoming law? How much? I am not in a position to speculate, but for a five-minute phone call, curt and impersonal, it felt like more impact than I was expecting in my ice-breaking, toe-dipping first foray.
